Midterm election results: Democrats win House, GOP holds Senate

   Democrats' hopes for a tidal wave to rebuke President Donald Trump have
   been tempered.

Midterms produce divided Congress: What does future hold?

   It's a split decision.

   Democrats won control of the House in Tuesday's critical midterm
   elections, and Republicans will hold the Senate after Sen. Ted Cruz,
   R-Texas, defeated Democratic challenger Beto O'Rouke, NBC News
   projects.

   House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi laid out the vision of a Democratic
   majority in the House, saying Tuesday night it will "be led with
   transparency and openness."

   "Today is more than about Democrats and Republicans it’s about
   restoring the constitution's check and balances to the Trump
   administration," she said in a speech. "It’s about stopping the GOP and
   (Senate Majority Leader) Mitch McConnell’s assault on Medicare and
   Medicaid, the Affordable Care Act, and the health care of 130 million
   Americans living with pre-existing medical conditions.”

Pelosi: Tonight is about 'restoring the Constitution's checks and balances'
to Trump

   In governor races, Democrats made some key gains even as Andrew Gillum
   in Florida was defeated and Stacey Abrams in Georgia was struggling.
   Both were vying to be their state's first African-American chief
   executives.

   "We recognize that we didn't win it tonight," Gillum told supporters.
   Abrams is trailing, though her race remains too close to call.

   With polls now closed in all states, Democrats' hopes for a tidal wave
   to rebuke President Donald Trump have been tempered by early returns
   that delivered some surprises in both directions for the out-of-power
   party.

   "This is not going to be the wave election that people like me hoped
   for, but it could still be a good election," Democratic strategist
   James Carville said on MSNBC.

   In addition to Texas, Republicans won key Senate contests in Indiana,
   North Dakota and Tennessee, suggesting the GOP may be on its way to
   ousting other vulnerable Democratic incumbents in red states, such as
   Missouri, where Sen. Claire McCaskill was defeated by Republican Josh
   Hawley, according to an NBC News projection.

   Still, the Democrats will find plenty of bright spots after a campaign
   that often seemed to be playing in two different universes, one for the
   House, where Trump was a liability for Republicans, and one for the
   Senate, where he was an asset.

   Powered by a suburban revolt against Trump, Democrats flipped more than
   two dozen congressional seats, a victory sweetened by out-of-the-blue
   victories in Oklahoma and Staten Island, New York, according to NBC
   News projections.

   Democratic activists are also likely to cheer the defeat in the Kansas
   governors race of Republican Kris Kobach, who has a national profile
   for cracking down on undocumented immigrants and allegations of voting
   fraud, and the passage of a referendum in Florida to restore voting
   rights to 1.5 million felons, according to NBC News projections.

Midterm results: Democrats flip House, GOP retains Senate

   Governor races also presented a mixed decision, with Republicans
   winning Ohio and Florida, both crucial to Democrats' 2020 plans, while
   Democrats won in Illinois, Minnesota, Colorado, and several others, and
   hold narrow leads in too-close-to-call races in Wisconsin and Iowa, two
   states Trump won.

   Meanwhile, Sen. Bob Menedez, D-N.J., whose trial on corruption charges
   ended in a hung jury last year, won another term, despite his
   Republican opponent spending $23 million on the race, much of it from
   his own bank account, NBC News projected.

   And a referendum to legalize marijuana in Michigan also appears headed
   for passage, though NBC News has not yet made a call in there.

   Democrats were hoping that voters would reject Trump and the
   nationalist vision for America he's championed in the closing weeks of
   the race. The first rounds of NBC News exit polls show a majority of
   Americans, 54 percent, do not approve of Trump, with a substantial
   number — 47 percent — expressing strong disapproval.

   Health care, which Democrats emphasized throughout the campaign, was
   the top issue for Americans, with 41 percent selecting it, followed by
   immigration and the economy, two issues seen as favoring Republicans,
   which were selected by 23 and 21 percent of voters, respectively.

   Overall, Americans expressed a fairly dim view of the state of
   politics, with 56 percent saying the country is on the wrong track and
   three-quarters of Americans saying the country is becoming more
   divided.

Sanders on senate wins: 'It's a huge win for the president'

   What is clear, however, is that few congressional elections have ever
   captivated so many Americans.

   Early voting exceeded 2014 levels in most states, according to
   TargetSmart, while campaign spending has been pushed to a record $5.2
   billion, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

   The superlatives demonstrate the significance millions of Americans
   have invested in this midterms, believing it will help determine the
   future of the country and who gets to be a part of it.

   “The character of this country is on the ballot. Who we are is on the
   ballot,” former President Barack Obama, hoarse from campaigning, told
   Democratic volunteers at a Virginia campaign office Monday.

   The race has already made history with a record number of women and
   people of color running for office, and gave voters a chance to make a
   number of firsts: First transgender governor, first Native American
   woman in Congress, first black woman governor, among others.

   Trump is not on the ballot, but the president has explicitly sought to
   make this election a referendum on his agenda as he campaigns for
   Republicans across the country, holding 53 campaign rallies in 23
   states, including 30 since Labor Day.

   "I need you to vote for a Republican House and a Republican Senate so
   we can continue this incredible movement," Trump told supporters in
   Indiana on Friday.

Midterm elections: What mattered most to voters?

   In almost every midterm since the Civil War, Americans have opted to
   put a check on the president by handing more power to the opposition
   party in Congress.

   The booming economy appears to be cushioning the blow for the GOP this
   year, but Trump has instead tended to focus on darker themes, for
   instance highlighting a caravan of migrants moving towards the U.S.
   southern border as much as he has the low unemployment rate.

   With the Democrats winning the House, they plan to wield Congress’ vast
   oversight authority against the White House and could even vote to
   impeach the president, though removing him from office seems out of the
   question, since that requires a supermajority in the Senate.
